EGRA focused on phonics-based reading instruction; by teaching children the sounds associated with various _graphemes_ (letters or combinations of letters, such as ‘_j_’, ‘_k_’, ‘_ck_’, ‘_ee_’, ‘_th_’, and so forth), phonics instruction equips them to “sound out” unfamiliar words in a text and match the sounds they hear with a word that is already part of their oral lexicon.  Each time a beginning reader successfully connects an unfamiliar string of characters to a word in their oral lexicon, their brain strengthens the connection between print and sound and meaning.  A well-crafted sequence of grapheme introduction can thus facilitate a virtuous cycle: by presenting children with the graphemes that compose words which appear in everyday oral language with very high frequency, the curriculum can set up ‘quick wins’ that both encourage the child (through early success) and reinforce the print-sound-meaning connection.  

The EGRA reading experts advocated a "high productivity" approach: presenting the graphemes (roughly, not exactly) according to the frequency with which they appear in the Chichewa language, with the understanding that this would lead to high-frequency words becoming decodable for children after very few lessons. This would quick-start the virtuous cycle of decoding success, and get the children rapidly on their way to proper reading. The sequence advocated by EGRA came to be known as "_anikumeto_" after the first nine graphemes to be introduced.  

The MIE staff, operating from both a misunderstanding of the phrase "alphabetic principle" in the technical reading-acquisition research literature and a preference for tradition, wished to follow a sequence that presented the vowels first (_a-e-i-o-u_) followed by the consonants in alphabetical order (_b-c-d-f-g...x-y-z_) and then multigraphs (combinations of letters such as _ck_, _ee_, _ea_, _ll_, _ng_). This was the same approach which had been used for well over a decade and resulted in abysmal reading outcomes; it was known as the "NPC" approach (for "National Primary Curriculum").

EGRA’s reading experts cited research; MIE staff merely asserted their authority as the arbiters of all things curricular, indifferent to the research; directors at the MOE, finding themselves in a difficult position, refused to take sides. As a result, curriculum development had stalled, and the new school year would be starting without revised textbooks and teacher’s guides.